docs/client.rst, before:

The Socket.IO Client
====================

This package contains two Socket.IO clients:

- The :func:`socketio.Client` class creates a client compatible with the
  standard Python library.
- The :func:`socketio.AsyncClient` class creates a client compatible with
  the ``asyncio`` package.

The methods in the two clients are the same, with the only difference that in
the ``asyncio`` client most methods are implemented as coroutines.

Installation
------------

To install the standard Python client along with its dependencies, use the
following command::

    pip install "python-socketio[client]"

If instead you plan on using the ``asyncio`` client, then use this::

    pip install "python-socketio[asyncio_client]"

Creating a Client Instance
--------------------------

To instantiate an Socket.IO client, simply create an instance of the
appropriate client class::

    import socketio

    # standard Python
    sio = socketio.Client()

    # asyncio
    sio = socketio.AsyncClient()

Defining Event Handlers
-----------------------

To responds to events triggered by the connection or the server, event Handler
functions must be defined using the ``on`` decorator::

    @sio.on('connect')
    def on_connect():
        print('I\'m connected!')

    @sio.on('message')
    def on_message(data):
        print('I received a message!')

    @sio.on('my message')
    def on_message(data):
        print('I received a custom message!')

    @sio.on('disconnect')
    def on_disconnect():
        print('I\'m disconnected!')

For the ``asyncio`` server, event handlers can be regular functions as above,
or can also be coroutines::

    @sio.on('message')
    async def on_message(data):
        print('I received a message!')

The argument given to the ``on`` decorator is the event name. The predefined
events that are supported are ``connect``, ``message`` and ``disconnect``. The
application can define any other desired event names.

Note that the ``disconnect`` handler is invoked for application initiated
disconnects, server initiated disconnects, or accidental disconnects, for 
example due to networking failures. In the case of an accidental disconnection,
the client is going to attempt to reconnect immediately after invoking the
disconnect handler. As soon as the connection is re-established the connect
handler will be invoked once again.

The ``data`` argument passed to the ``'message'`` and custom event Handlers
contains application-specific data provided by the server.

Connecting to a Server
----------------------

The connection to a server is established by calling the ``connect()``
method::

    sio.connect('http://localhost:5000')

In the case of the ``asyncio`` client, the method is a coroutine::

    await sio.connect('http://localhost:5000')

Emitting Events
---------------

The client can emit an event to the server using the ``emit()`` method::

    sio.emit('my message', {'foo': 'bar'})

Or in the case of ``asyncio``, as a coroutine::

    await sio.emit('my message', {'foo': 'bar'})

The single argument provided to the method is the data that is passed on
to the server. The data can be of type ``str``, ``bytes``, ``dict`` or
``list``. The data included inside dictionaries and lists is also
constrained to these types.

The ``emit()`` method can be invoked inside an event handler as a response
to a server event, or in any other part of the application, including in
background tasks.

For convenience, a ``send()`` method is also provided. This method accepts
a data element as its only argument, and emits the standard ``message``
event with it::

    sio.send('some data')

In the case of ``asyncio``, ``send()`` is a coroutine::

    await sio.send('some data')

Event Callbacks
---------------

When a server emits an event to a client, it can optionally provide a
callback function, to be invoked as a way of acknowledgment that the server
has processed the event. While this is entirely managed by the server, the
client can provide a list of return values that are to be passed on to the
callback function set up by the server. This is achieves simply by returning
the desired values from the handler function::

    @sio.on('my event', namespace='/chat')
    def my_event_handler(sid, data):
        # handle the message
        return "OK", 123

Likewise, the client can request a callback function to be invoked after the
server has processed an event. The :func:`socketio.Server.emit` method has an
optional ``callback`` argument that can be set to a callable. If this
argument is given, the callable will be invoked after the server has processed
the event, and any values returned by the server handler will be passed as
arguments to this function.

Namespaces
----------

The Socket.IO protocol supports multiple logical connections, all multiplexed
on the same physical connection. Clients can open multiple connections by
specifying a different *namespace* on each. Namespaces use a path syntax
starting with a forward slash. A list of namespaces can be given by the client
in the ``connect()`` call. For example, this example creates two logical
connections, the default one plus a second connection under the ``/chat``
namespace::

    sio.connect('http://localhost:5000', namespaces=['/chat'])

To define event handlers on a namespace, the ``namespace`` argument must be
added to the ``on`` decorator::

    @sio.on('connect', namespace='/chat')
    def on_connect():
        print('I\'m connected to the /chat namespace!')

Likewise, the client can emit an event to the server on a namespace by
providing its in the ``emit()`` call::

    sio.emit('my message', {'foo': 'bar'}, namespace='/chat')

If the ``namespaces`` argument of the ``connect()`` call isn't given, any
namespaces used in event handlers are automatically connected.

Class-Based Namespaces
----------------------

As an alternative to the decorator-based event handlers, the event handlers
that belong to a namespace can be created as methods of a subclass of 
:class:`socketio.ClientNamespace`::

    class MyCustomNamespace(socketio.ClientNamespace):
        def on_connect(self):
            pass

        def on_disconnect(self):
            pass

        def on_my_event(self, data):
            self.emit('my_response', data)

    sio.register_namespace(MyCustomNamespace('/chat'))

For asyncio based severs, namespaces must inherit from
:class:`socketio.AsyncClientNamespace`, and can define event handlers as
coroutines if desired::

    class MyCustomNamespace(socketio.AsyncClientNamespace):
        def on_connect(self):
            pass

        def on_disconnect(self):
            pass

        async def on_my_event(self, data):
            await self.emit('my_response', data)

    sio.register_namespace(MyCustomNamespace('/chat'))

When class-based namespaces are used, any events received by the client are
dispatched to a method named as the event name with the ``on_`` prefix. For
example, event ``my_event`` will be handled by a method named ``on_my_event``.
If an event is received for which there is no corresponding method defined in
the namespace class, then the event is ignored. All event names used in
class-based namespaces must use characters that are legal in method names.

As a convenience to methods defined in a class-based namespace, the namespace
instance includes versions of several of the methods in the 
:class:`socketio.Client` and :class:`socketio.AsyncClient` classes that
default to the proper namespace when the ``namespace`` argument is not given.

In the case that an event has a handler in a class-based namespace, and also a
decorator-based function handler, only the standalone function handler is
invoked.

Disconnecting from the Server
-----------------------------

At any time the client can request to be disconnected from the server by
invoking the ``disconnect()`` method::

    sio.disconnect()

For the ``asyncio`` client this is a coroutine::

    await sio.disconnect()

Managing Background Tasks
-------------------------

When a client connection to the server is established, a few background
tasks will be spawned to keep the connection alive and handle incoming
events. The application running on the main thread is free to do any
work, as this is not going to prevent the functioning of the Socket.IO
client.

If the application does not have anything to do in the main thread and
just wants to wait until the connection with the server ends, it can call
the ``wait()`` method::

    sio.wait()

Or in the ``asyncio`` version::

    await sio.wait()

For the convenience of the application, a helper function is provided to
start a custom background task::

    def my_background_task(my_argument)
        # do some background work here!
        pass

    sio.start_background_task(my_background_task, 123)

The arguments passed to this method are the background function and any
positional or keyword arguments to invoke the function with. 

Here is the ``asyncio`` version::

    async def my_background_task(my_argument)
        # do some background work here!
        pass

    sio.start_background_task(my_background_task, 123)

Note that this function is not a coroutine, since it does not wait for the
background function to end. The background function must be a coroutine.

The ``sleep()`` method is a second convenince function that is provided for
the benefit of applications working with background tasks of their own::

    sio.sleep(2)

Or for ``asyncio``::

    await sio.sleep(2)

The single argument passed to the method is the number of seconds to sleep
for.

Commit message:

expose the sid for the connection

docs/client.rst, after:

The Socket.IO Client
====================

This package contains two Socket.IO clients:

- The :func:`socketio.Client` class creates a client compatible with the
  standard Python library.
- The :func:`socketio.AsyncClient` class creates a client compatible with
  the ``asyncio`` package.

The methods in the two clients are the same, with the only difference that in
the ``asyncio`` client most methods are implemented as coroutines.

Installation
------------

To install the standard Python client along with its dependencies, use the
following command::

    pip install "python-socketio[client]"

If instead you plan on using the ``asyncio`` client, then use this::

    pip install "python-socketio[asyncio_client]"

Creating a Client Instance
--------------------------

To instantiate an Socket.IO client, simply create an instance of the
appropriate client class::

    import socketio

    # standard Python
    sio = socketio.Client()

    # asyncio
    sio = socketio.AsyncClient()

Defining Event Handlers
-----------------------

To responds to events triggered by the connection or the server, event Handler
functions must be defined using the ``on`` decorator::

    @sio.on('connect')
    def on_connect():
        print('I\'m connected!')

    @sio.on('message')
    def on_message(data):
        print('I received a message!')

    @sio.on('my message')
    def on_message(data):
        print('I received a custom message!')

    @sio.on('disconnect')
    def on_disconnect():
        print('I\'m disconnected!')

For the ``asyncio`` server, event handlers can be regular functions as above,
or can also be coroutines::

    @sio.on('message')
    async def on_message(data):
        print('I received a message!')

The argument given to the ``on`` decorator is the event name. The predefined
events that are supported are ``connect``, ``message`` and ``disconnect``. The
application can define any other desired event names.

Note that the ``disconnect`` handler is invoked for application initiated
disconnects, server initiated disconnects, or accidental disconnects, for 
example due to networking failures. In the case of an accidental disconnection,
the client is going to attempt to reconnect immediately after invoking the
disconnect handler. As soon as the connection is re-established the connect
handler will be invoked once again.

The ``data`` argument passed to the ``'message'`` and custom event Handlers
contains application-specific data provided by the server.

Connecting to a Server
----------------------

The connection to a server is established by calling the ``connect()``
method::

    sio.connect('http://localhost:5000')

In the case of the ``asyncio`` client, the method is a coroutine::

    await sio.connect('http://localhost:5000')

Upon connection, the server assigns the client a unique session identifier.
The applicaction can find this identifier in the ``sid`` attribute::

    print('my sid is', sio.sid)

Emitting Events
---------------

The client can emit an event to the server using the ``emit()`` method::

    sio.emit('my message', {'foo': 'bar'})

Or in the case of ``asyncio``, as a coroutine::

    await sio.emit('my message', {'foo': 'bar'})

The single argument provided to the method is the data that is passed on
to the server. The data can be of type ``str``, ``bytes``, ``dict`` or
``list``. The data included inside dictionaries and lists is also
constrained to these types.

The ``emit()`` method can be invoked inside an event handler as a response
to a server event, or in any other part of the application, including in
background tasks.

For convenience, a ``send()`` method is also provided. This method accepts
a data element as its only argument, and emits the standard ``message``
event with it::

    sio.send('some data')

In the case of ``asyncio``, ``send()`` is a coroutine::

    await sio.send('some data')

Event Callbacks
---------------

When a server emits an event to a client, it can optionally provide a
callback function, to be invoked as a way of acknowledgment that the server
has processed the event. While this is entirely managed by the server, the
client can provide a list of return values that are to be passed on to the
callback function set up by the server. This is achieves simply by returning
the desired values from the handler function::

    @sio.on('my event', namespace='/chat')
    def my_event_handler(sid, data):
        # handle the message
        return "OK", 123

Likewise, the client can request a callback function to be invoked after the
server has processed an event. The :func:`socketio.Server.emit` method has an
optional ``callback`` argument that can be set to a callable. If this
argument is given, the callable will be invoked after the server has processed
the event, and any values returned by the server handler will be passed as
arguments to this function.

Namespaces
----------

The Socket.IO protocol supports multiple logical connections, all multiplexed
on the same physical connection. Clients can open multiple connections by
specifying a different *namespace* on each. Namespaces use a path syntax
starting with a forward slash. A list of namespaces can be given by the client
in the ``connect()`` call. For example, this example creates two logical
connections, the default one plus a second connection under the ``/chat``
namespace::

    sio.connect('http://localhost:5000', namespaces=['/chat'])

To define event handlers on a namespace, the ``namespace`` argument must be
added to the ``on`` decorator::

    @sio.on('connect', namespace='/chat')
    def on_connect():
        print('I\'m connected to the /chat namespace!')

Likewise, the client can emit an event to the server on a namespace by
providing its in the ``emit()`` call::

    sio.emit('my message', {'foo': 'bar'}, namespace='/chat')

If the ``namespaces`` argument of the ``connect()`` call isn't given, any
namespaces used in event handlers are automatically connected.

Class-Based Namespaces
----------------------

As an alternative to the decorator-based event handlers, the event handlers
that belong to a namespace can be created as methods of a subclass of 
:class:`socketio.ClientNamespace`::

    class MyCustomNamespace(socketio.ClientNamespace):
        def on_connect(self):
            pass

        def on_disconnect(self):
            pass

        def on_my_event(self, data):
            self.emit('my_response', data)

    sio.register_namespace(MyCustomNamespace('/chat'))

For asyncio based severs, namespaces must inherit from
:class:`socketio.AsyncClientNamespace`, and can define event handlers as
coroutines if desired::

    class MyCustomNamespace(socketio.AsyncClientNamespace):
        def on_connect(self):
            pass

        def on_disconnect(self):
            pass

        async def on_my_event(self, data):
            await self.emit('my_response', data)

    sio.register_namespace(MyCustomNamespace('/chat'))

When class-based namespaces are used, any events received by the client are
dispatched to a method named as the event name with the ``on_`` prefix. For
example, event ``my_event`` will be handled by a method named ``on_my_event``.
If an event is received for which there is no corresponding method defined in
the namespace class, then the event is ignored. All event names used in
class-based namespaces must use characters that are legal in method names.

As a convenience to methods defined in a class-based namespace, the namespace
instance includes versions of several of the methods in the 
:class:`socketio.Client` and :class:`socketio.AsyncClient` classes that
default to the proper namespace when the ``namespace`` argument is not given.

In the case that an event has a handler in a class-based namespace, and also a
decorator-based function handler, only the standalone function handler is
invoked.

Disconnecting from the Server
-----------------------------

At any time the client can request to be disconnected from the server by
invoking the ``disconnect()`` method::

    sio.disconnect()

For the ``asyncio`` client this is a coroutine::

    await sio.disconnect()

Managing Background Tasks
-------------------------

When a client connection to the server is established, a few background
tasks will be spawned to keep the connection alive and handle incoming
events. The application running on the main thread is free to do any
work, as this is not going to prevent the functioning of the Socket.IO
client.

If the application does not have anything to do in the main thread and
just wants to wait until the connection with the server ends, it can call
the ``wait()`` method::

    sio.wait()

Or in the ``asyncio`` version::

    await sio.wait()

For the convenience of the application, a helper function is provided to
start a custom background task::

    def my_background_task(my_argument)
        # do some background work here!
        pass

    sio.start_background_task(my_background_task, 123)

The arguments passed to this method are the background function and any
positional or keyword arguments to invoke the function with. 

Here is the ``asyncio`` version::

    async def my_background_task(my_argument)
        # do some background work here!
        pass

    sio.start_background_task(my_background_task, 123)

Note that this function is not a coroutine, since it does not wait for the
background function to end. The background function must be a coroutine.

The ``sleep()`` method is a second convenince function that is provided for
the benefit of applications working with background tasks of their own::

    sio.sleep(2)

Or for ``asyncio``::

    await sio.sleep(2)

The single argument passed to the method is the number of seconds to sleep
for.
